docs: Kubernetes external connectivity (#999)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/platform/kubernetes-configuration/networking-and-connectivity.mdx

4. Cluster domain

The Redpanda brokers advertise these addresses so that internal clients can connect to individual brokers, and brokers within the same cluster can communicate with eachother. For example, this is the configuration for a Redpanda broker running in a Pod called `redpanda-0` in the `redpanda` namespace:

```yaml title="/etc/redpanda/redpanda.yaml"
redpanda:
  advertised_kafka_api:
    - address: redpanda-0.redpanda.redpanda.svc.cluster.local.
      port: 10092
      name: internal
```

## External networking

External clients must connect to the _external addresses_ that the Redpanda brokers advertise. Since external clients are not in the Kubernetes cluster where the Redpanda brokers are running, they cannot resolve the internal addresses of the headless ClusterIP Service. Instead, the Redpanda brokers must be exposed through one of following Kubernetes Services:

- NodePort (fastest and cheapest)
- LoadBalancer

:::info
To make each Redpanda broker addressable through a Service, each Redpanda broker should run on its own worker node. This way, clients or load balancers can use the address of the worker nodes to connect to specific Redpanda brokers.
:::

> ### NodePort

Author: ```suggestion
### NodePort Service
```

---
title: Networking and Connectivity in Kubernetes
tags:
  - Helm
  - Helm configuration
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Networking and Connectivity in Kubernetes | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Learn how to expose Redpanda clusters to clients outside Kubernetes."/>
</head>

> Clients needs to be able to connect directly to each Pod that runs a Redpanda broker. To write to or read from a given partition, clients connect directly to the leader broker that hosts that partition. As a result, brokers advertise their addresses in the metadata of API responses.

Author: ```suggestion
Clients must be able to connect directly to each Pod that runs a Redpanda broker. To write to or read from a given partition, clients connect directly to the leader broker that hosts that partition.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

- NodePort (fastest and cheapest)
- LoadBalancer

:::info
To make each Redpanda broker addressable through a Service, each Redpanda broker should run on its own worker node. This way, clients or load balancers can use the address of the worker nodes to connect to specific Redpanda brokers.
:::

### NodePort

When you use a NodePort Service, each worker node that runs a Redpanda broker is allocated a port for each listener. All traffic to these ports is routed directly to the worker node's local Redpanda broker through this Service:

Listener |Default node port
---|---
|Admin API|31644
|Kafka API|31092
|PandaProxy|30082
|Schema registry|30081

The NodePort Service has its `service.spec.externalTrafficPolicy` configuration set to `Local` so that clients can send a request to a specific worker node and it will go to the local Redpanda broker on the node.

> ### LoadBalancer

Reviewer: `LoadBalancer` appears to be referred to everywhere as `LoadBalancer Service`, so should this heading be changed?

```suggestion
### LoadBalancer Service
```
